---
layout: single
author_profile: false
title: "Why Test?"
date:   2018-09-30 21:17:08 -0500
categories: [tech]
---

For the first third of my programming career, I wrote no tests. This was painful because I had to manually test everything all the time, and I often missed things that could have been caught by a simple unit test.

The second third of my career, I wrote tests, but only after I had finished writing the feature. While I knew that “testing was important,” I wasn’t confident enough in my abilities to have them drive my work. So I was writing a lot of tests, but not getting much benefit from them. This made testing feel more like a chore than a real asset to my daily life.

For the last third of my career, I’ve been committed to practicing Test-Driven Development as faithfully as I can. I’m the closest I’ve ever been to doing full-time TDD, and I feel like it’s finally clicked for me. Working this way has been the single greatest boost to my coding. I’m faster, more confident, and less overwhelmed by new and foreign tasks.

Which has made me wonder — why didn’t I just do this from the beginning? I certainly was taught the basics of TDD at my bootcamp. I was told by other developers that “testing is important.” Am I just stubborn? (Well, yes.) Was I naive? (Also yes.) But… was I under a lot of pressure to prove my efficiency as a team member? Did I lack the experience to understand how testing played into the larger lifecycle of a product? Was I working in environments where automated testing was encouraged and practiced?

These are some of the common barriers faced by early-career developers when learning how to test. And while some of these barriers are structural, I believe having a realistic perspective on automated testing can better help people learn it, adopt it, and demonstrate its value to others.

I’ve been reading Noel Rappin’s new book, [Rails 5 Test Prescriptions](https://pragprog.com/titles/nrtest3/){:target="_blank"}, which I would recommend not only to Ruby programmers, but to anyone who wants to learn what TDD is all about. It gives very practical tips, but what I’m enjoying the most are his explanations of what TDD is for, and why we do it. Noel writes,

> "TDD is a software-development technique masquerading as a code-verification tool… The kinds of tests written in TDD are not a substitute for acceptance testing… TDD is simply a development process that produces better and more accurate code."

I once had the idea that TDD could find all of my bugs, and thus solve all of my problems. But this is a pie-in-the-sky aspiration. TDD is a tool above all else. It doesn’t have the final say on whether a feature is complete, or up to end-user standards. It’s simply a method that enforces clear thinking.

What advantage does that method give you? Most importantly, it gives you a source of truth to rely on. If there is any single truth in code, it’s that it will need to change. Again, Noel writes,

> "When there is a discrepancy between the code and the tests, your first assumption is that the test is correct and the code is wrong. If you’re writing tests after the code, then your assumption must be that the code is the source of truth."

Having a source of truth apart from my code allows me to change my code faster and more confidently. It’s in these times when I feel the value of testing the most.

However, it took a lot of time and practice to learn to write tests that were flexible enough to work for me instead of against me. And I still don’t get it “right” as often as I’d like. For a while, my tests were so brittle that any code change meant re-writing a test. This is a dispiriting way to work, and I believe it’s why many early-career developers start TDD with a lot of hope, but end up abandoning it.

To prevent situations like this, it’s important that managing engineers don’t simply say “write more tests,” but explain what the real purposes of testing are, have an honest discussion about what testing can and cannot solve, and show real-world examples of how testing can benefit individuals and the team at large.