---
layout: single
author_profile: false
title: "Birding"
date:   2020-09-12 12:00:00 -0500
categories: [life]
---

Once about nine years ago, I was running at Montrose Beach on a late winter day, and saw a bunch of people with binoculars, all pointing in the same direction. I stopped and asked what they were looking at, and they were eager to show me. Looking through a friendly birder's binoculars, I witnessed a majestic Snowy Owl, nested on top of the Montrose Beach building. A giant spread of this owl was on the front page of the Chicago Tribune the next day.

That magical experience has long been stuck in the back of my mind. This summer, partly inspired by the owl and partly inspired by Jenny Odell's book, _How To Do Nothing_, I decided to try birding, formally, for the first time. By formally, I mean I took some old binoculors out of our storage closet, walked to the lakefront, and looked at birds through them. I went to the Montrose Bird Sanctuary, near the place where I saw the owl, and a place I've jogged by countless times, but never went through.

My birding experience was surpisingly social, even though I went by myself. Since this is a pretty popular birding place in Chicago, I wasn't alone on the trail. Simply by carrying binoculors, I gave people the impression that I knew what I was doing, and they started asking me questions. My response was a friendly shrug.

A practical tip I'll remember next time: wear clothes that cover the body, or at the very least, pants. Something I never noticed running here is that the wooded areas get buggy. I was distracted many times from birding by the flies and gnats biting my legs. Rookie mistake.

Even though it's a bummer the lakefront beaches are closed, I've been enjoying a quieter, car-less Montrose Harbor. The roads have been taken over by the occasional pod of cyclists, or the lone rollerblader. I can hear things now that I couldn't (or didn't care to listen to) before. Sure, I miss the energy of a regular summer at Montrose Beach, with cookouts happening all over the place, their different tunes clashing with each other. But for now I'll enjoy listening to the birds and the waves.

Beginning birding after seeing a Snowy Owl may seem anticlimactic. It's like deciding to collect diamonds after you get the Hope Diamond. But the type of bird really wasn't the point. There was a quiet thrill to it, watching things that can go anywhere, but are just fine where they are.